The Tempest.

The earliest copy of "The Tempest" known is that in the folio of 1623. To the precise date of its production we have no clue, but the following memorandum from the "Accounts of the Revels at Court," is almost positive testimony that it was written before 1611:--

<!--weird formatting here-->
By the King's        Hallomas nyght was presented att Whithall
Players.             ye Kinges Matle. a play called the Tempest
<!--end weird formatting-->

And the speech of Gonzalo, Act II. Sc. 1,--

<!--more weird formatting-->
"I' the commonwealth I would by contraries," &c.--
<!--end weird formatting-->

which is obviously taken from a passage in Florio's translation of Montaigne's Essayes, first printed in 1603, is equally decisive as to its having been written after that year. The story upon which "The Tempest" is founded, was most probably dervied, according to Shakespeare's usual practice, from an existing play or from some popular chronicle or romance. Collins the poet, indeed, informed T. Warton, that he had met with a novel called Aurelio and Isabella, printed in Italian, Spanish, French, and English, in 1588, which he conceived to have formed the basis of "The Tempest." When he spoke of the circumstance, however, Collins was labouring under mental debility, and so far as the particular novel he mentioned was concerned his memory deceived him, for the fable of Aurelio and Isabella bears no resemblance to that of the play; yet it is remarkable that a friend of James Boswell declared that he had once perused an Italian novel which answered to Collins's description. In an article on the early English and German dramas published in the New Monthly Magazine for January, 1841, Mr. Thoms pointed out a dramatic piece by Jacob Ayrer, a notary of Nurnberg, contemporary with Shakespeare, entitled <!--italics-->Die schöne Sidea<!--/italics-->, (The Beautiful Sidea,) which bears some resemnblance to "The Tempest," and which Tieck conjectured was a translation of some old English drama from which Shakespeare borrowed his idea. How far this is probably the reader must judge from the following outline of the German play: Ludolph having been vanquished by his rival, and with his daughter Sidea driven into a forest, rebukes her for complaining of their change of fortune, and then summons his spirit Runcifal, who is, like Ariel, somewhat "moody," announces to Ludolph that the son of his enemy will shortly become his prisoner. After a comic episode, most probably introduced by the German, we see Prince Leudegast, with his son Engelbrecht and the councillors, hunting in the same forest; when Engelbrecht and his companion Famulus, having separated from the associates, are suddenly encountered by Ludolph and his daughter. On his commanding them to yield themselves prisoners, they refuse; but on attempting to draw their swords, Ludolph renders them powerless by the touch of his magical wand, and gives the prince over to Sidea to carry logs of wood for her, and to obey her commands in all respects. The resemblance between the German and English plays is continued in a later part of the former production, when Sidea, moved by pity for the labours of Engelbrecht in carrying logs, exclaims, she would "feel great joy, if he would prove faithful to me, and take me in wedlock;" an event which in the end, is happily brought about, and leads to the reconciliation of their parents, the rival princes.

The title of "The Tempest" is supposed by some commentators to have been determined by the shipwreck of Sir George Sommers and Sir Thomas Gates on the coast of the Bermudas in 1609;

<!-- FORM WORK -->
3       B2

<!--PAGE BREAK-->

<!--FORM WORK-->
The Tempest

<!--main body text-->
of which an account was published by Silvester Jourdan,one of the crew, in the following year:-- <!--italics-->A Discovery of the Barmudas ; otherwise called the Isle of Divels ; by Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Sommers, and Captayne Newport, with divers others.<!--/italics--> It is highly probable, too, that Jourdan's and other accounts of the Bermudas, by some of which they are said to be enchanted and inhabited by witches and devils, suggested the expression "still-vexed Bermoothes," and induced the poet to possess his hero with necromantic influence and supernatural agency. Mr. Hunter, in his "Disquisition on the Scene, Origin, Date, &c. of Shakspeare's Tempest," has laboured with great ingenuity to prove that the actual scene of the play was Lampedusa, "an island of the Mediterranean lying not far out of a ship's course passing from Tunis to Naples," and which is uninhabited, and supposed by sailors to be enchanted. The same idea was suggested, or occured to Douce, who thus speaks of it:--"The Island of Lampedusa is near the coast of Tunis ; and from its description, in Dapper, and the real tract of the King of Naples' voyage in Shakeseare's Tempest, will turn out to be the veritable island where he was shipwrecked, and to which Prospero had been banished, whenever the Italian novel on which the play founded shall be discovered." We fervently hope note; being contented to believe it rose, like a new Atlantis, at the summons of the poet, and when his magic work on it was done:--

<!--verse-->
"From that day forth the Isle had beene
By wandering sailors never seene :
Some say 'tis buried deepe
Beneath the sea, which breakes and rores
Above its savage rockie shores,
Nor ere is known to sleepe."
<!--end verse-->

<!--head-->
Persons Represented.
<!--column 1-->
Alonso, King of Naples.
Ferdinand, his Son.
Sebastian, Brother to the King.
Prospero, the rightful Duke of Milan.
Antonio, his Brother, the Usurping Duke of Milan.
Gonzalo, an honest old Counsellor.
Adrian,         }Lords
Francisco,
Stephano, a drunken Butler.
Trinculo, a Jester.

<!--column 2-->
Master of a Ship, Boatswain, and Mariners.
Caliban, a savage and deformed Slave.
Miranda, Daughter to Prospero
Ariel, an airy Spirit.
Juno,           }Spirits
Ceres,
Iris,
Nyphs,
Reapers,
Other Spirits attending on Prospero.

Scene, On board a Ship at Sea; afterwards on an Island.

<!--form work-->
4

<!--new page-->
<!--picture?????-->
Act 1

Scene 1.-- On a Ship at Sea. A tempestuous noise of thunder and lightning heard.

<!--column 1-->
Enter a Ship-master and a Boatswain severally.

Master. Boatswain!
Boats. Here, master: what cheer?

<!--column 2-->

Master. Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't yarely EXPONENT a, or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.
[Exit.

a Yarely,--] Briskly, nimbly, actively.

<!--new page, column 1-->
Enter Mariners.

Boats. Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! yare, yare! Take in the topsail! Tend to the master's whistle! [Exeunt Mariners] Blow, till thou burst they wind, if room enough!

Enter Alonso, Ferdinand, Sebastian, Antonio, Gonzalo, and others.

Alon. Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master? Play the men.
Boats. I pray now, keep below.
Ant. Where is the master, boson?
Boats. Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your cabins; you do assist the storm.
Gon. Nay, good, be patient.
Boats. When the sea is. Hence! what care these roarers for the name of the king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.
Gon. Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
Boats. None that I love more than myself. You are a counsellor;-- if you can command these elements to silence, and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more; use your authority: if you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.-- Cheerly, good hearts!-- Out of our way, I say.

[Exit.

Gon. I have great comfort from this fellow; methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging! make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage! If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.

[Exeunt.

Re-enter Boatswain.

Boats. Down with the topmast! yare; lower, lower! Bring her to try with main-course!a<!--footnote--> [A cry within.] A plague upon this howling! they are louder than the weather or our office.--

Re-enter Sebastian, Antonio, and Gonzalo.

Yet again! what do you here? shall we give o'er and drown? have you a mind to sink?

<!--footnote-->
a Bring her to try with the main-course!] It has been proposed to read, "Bring her to; try with the main-course;" but see a passage from Hakluyt's Voyages, 1598, quoted by Malone:-- "and when the barke had way, we cut the hawser and so gate the sea to our friend, and tryed out al that day with our maine corse."

<!--new column-->
Seb. A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!
Boats. Work you, then.
Ant. Hang, cur, hang! you whoreson, insolent noise-maker, we are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
Gon. I'll warrant him for drowning; though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell, and as leaky as an unstanched wench.
Boats. Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses! off to sea again; lay her off!

Re-enter Mariners, wet.

Mar. All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!

[Exeunt.

Boats. What, must our mouths be cold?
Gon. The king and prince at prayers! let's assist them,
For our case is as theirs.
Seb.   I'm out of patience.
Ant. We are merely cheated out of our lives by drunkards:--
this wide-chapp'd rascal,-- would thou mightst lie drowning,
The washing of ten tides!
Gon.  He'll be hang'd yet, Thoughh every drop of water swear against it,
and gape at wid'st to glut him.

[A confused noise within.]--Mercy on us!-- We split, we split!-- Farewell, my wife and children!
Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!--(1)

[Exit Boatswain.

Ant. Let's all sink with the king.
[Exit
Seb. Let's take leave of him.
[Exit
Gon. Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground,-- long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done! but I would fain die a dry death.
[Exit.

Scene II.-- The Island: before the Cell of Prospero.

Enter Prospero and Miranda.

Mira. If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.b <!--footnote-->
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,

<!--footnote-->
b If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.]
These lines are not metrical, and sound but gratingly on the ear. It would be an improvement perhaps if we read them thus,--
"if by your art, my dearest father, you
Have put the wild waters in this roar, allay them."
